I think we may get going.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon everyone.
We have a pre lecture thing which we will do
NOTE CONF
whilst you're still sitting down.
So here is Alice who you saw on the slide
NOTE CONF
in the introductory lecture in person for some other reason.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Hi everyone.
Um, I did I tell them to be quiet.
NOTE CONF
Hi everyone, I'm Alice.
I am the Secretary of Hopes.
NOTE CONF
So we're the gender diversity and Informatics society.
We do loads of stuff, but basically our main aim
NOTE CONF
is to create an inclusive space for everyone who studies
informatics to kind of learn, meet new people, have fun.
NOTE CONF
So we do a bunch of different things.
We do socials, board games nights, pub crawls.
NOTE CONF
We're doing a ceilidh.
If you haven't done a ceilidh before, it's like a
NOTE CONF
Scottish dance.
You do not need to be able to dance.
NOTE CONF
They kind of tell you how to do it.
When you're there.
NOTE CONF
There's free food, free drinks.
We've got a QR code for it on the slide,
NOTE CONF
um, arts and crafts events, that sort of thing.
But we also do tech events, so we get women
NOTE CONF
and non-binary students and industry to come and give talks
about what they do.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a really good place to network.
You get free pizza, you get advice about what they
NOTE CONF
think is a good thing to do for your career
path, and you get to learn about different careers.
NOTE CONF
That's really good.
And then finally, we do a hackathon.
NOTE CONF
If you haven't done a hackathon before, it's an all
day coding challenge.
NOTE CONF
It's all one is super beginner friendly.
It's only one day.
NOTE CONF
Some of them are massively long.
There'll be loads of mentors to help you out.
NOTE CONF
You're in teams and there are loads of prizes to
win and free food again.
NOTE CONF
So yeah, this is our Instagram if you'd like to
follow us.
NOTE CONF
And that's where we post all our events and everyone's
welcome.
NOTE CONF
You don't need to be a woman or non-binary student.
You don't need to study informatics.
NOTE CONF
It's just very inclusive and we just want everyone to
come basically.
NOTE CONF
So yeah.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully I'll see you soon.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon everybody.
Back to normal.
NOTE CONF
Um, you do not get music at the beginning of
my lectures.
NOTE CONF
This is because I do not fancy the $20,000 fine
and two months in prison that each public performance violation
NOTE CONF
might result in.
This also because I can't be bothered.
NOTE CONF
So as you heard in the introductory lecture, I'm dealing
with the computation and logic part of the course.
NOTE CONF
And since I'm privileged to have your attention, I thought
I might start with a bit of more random stuff
NOTE CONF
about university teaching learning.
And then just a little bit about my interest before
NOTE CONF
we move into the material.
So in the introductory lecture, Don gave you the pep
NOTE CONF
talk, the official story.
I want to inject a little bit of realism into
NOTE CONF
some of the things that were said then.
And one of the reasons I want to inject a
NOTE CONF
bit of realism is because I screwed up in my
undergraduate degree, and some of you might be in danger
NOTE CONF
of doing the same thing that I did, and I
don't want you to.
NOTE CONF
So I want to say, I'll give you a little
bit of history and advice and warning, as well as
NOTE CONF
talk a bit about my philosophy of teaching.
So firstly, I don't like technology.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is my phone.
It's five years old and it will stay there until
NOTE CONF
it breaks completely.
That means I'm not going to do woo clap, and
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to do all the other fancy stuff.
But I do like a lot of interaction.
NOTE CONF
So the interaction means you talking to us in the
lecture.
NOTE CONF
Not too much, otherwise we won't have time.
But it's nice when lectures are a conversation and not
NOTE CONF
a monologue.
So at various points I'll be asking you to shout
NOTE CONF
out random things if you feel shy about that.
Of course you don't have to, but try to get
NOTE CONF
over your shyness.
I managed to get over my shyness to the point
NOTE CONF
that I can stand up in front of 400 people,
and when I first started as a lecturer, that was
NOTE CONF
terrifying.
I also wanted to say a little bit about what
NOTE CONF
a lecture is for.
What do you think a lecture is for?
NOTE CONF
What's the purpose of lectures, given that there's vast amounts
of research saying that they don't work very well?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
To learn.
NOTE CONF
That's a much better answer than some answers that could
be given, which might be to be taught.
NOTE CONF
So you've brought one of the key things about university.
Don talked a lot about teaching, but actually university isn't
NOTE CONF
about teaching.
It's about enabling to learn.
NOTE CONF
If you follow the news, you know that down in
England, the universities are agitating for an increase in fees.
NOTE CONF
That's a very good reason for that, because it costs
much more to educate a student than we get paid
NOTE CONF
to do it.
Um, but you may have seen on the BBC some
NOTE CONF
student at in Manchester saying I get lectures every second
day.
NOTE CONF
I don't get £10,000 worth of teaching.
And that's the attitude that doesn't work, because in a
NOTE CONF
university degree, most of the work is done by you
outside of the timetabled activities.
NOTE CONF
How much time should you be expecting to spend out
of the timetabled activities?
NOTE CONF
That's a very difficult question.
So we like to say treat university as if it's
NOTE CONF
a full time job, and by that we mean 40
hours a week, not 35 hours a week.
NOTE CONF
However, it's not really like that.
It depends very much on you.
NOTE CONF
So the other thing that you need to appreciate for
many reasons is that there are 400 of you, and
NOTE CONF
there's an enormous range of experience.
And to be blunt, ability, I guess most of you
NOTE CONF
have a string of A's at Highers or a string
of A's and a star at A-level.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because you had to to come here.
NOTE CONF
But everybody here does.
And there's still an enormous difference between.
NOTE CONF
People in the class.
So I was a star school pupil.
NOTE CONF
I went to university and suddenly I was about halfway
up, and the best people were two, three, five, ten
NOTE CONF
times as clever as me.
So undoubtedly, in this room, some of you are a
NOTE CONF
good deal cleverer than I am.
And for me, that's one of the perks of being
NOTE CONF
at university.
The point of being university is to be around very
NOTE CONF
clever people and learn from them.
So what about lectures?
NOTE CONF
Lectures are very bad as a means of transmitting information.
So why do I still do lectures?
NOTE CONF
Because I think lectures can be useful.
Not so much to ram information into your brains.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't work for me.
It does work for some people, but because they provide
NOTE CONF
a framework which you can then use to build your
own understanding on.
NOTE CONF
So my aim in a lecture is to give you
a high level, broad understanding of what it is we're
NOTE CONF
doing.
There's quite a bit of detail as well, but you
NOTE CONF
don't necessarily expect to understand the detail in full as
I'm talking about it.
NOTE CONF
But having the framework in place, you should then be
able to go away, do the reading, do the tutorial
NOTE CONF
exercises, and hopefully then understand the detail.
Don talked on Monday about programming not being a spectator
NOTE CONF
sport.
I'm not teaching programming, although there will be programming.
NOTE CONF
But logic is also not a spectator sport.
In fact, no, mathematics is a spectator sport.
NOTE CONF
One has to do it to learn it.
Um, so I said 40 hours is a myth.
NOTE CONF
How long are you actually going to spend.
So some of you can probably get through the entirety
NOTE CONF
of first year doing 5 to 10 hours a week
of work.
NOTE CONF
But that's not many of you.
And you have to be very confident and make sure
NOTE CONF
that that is you.
Before you assume you can do that, others are going
NOTE CONF
to have to spend probably realistically 20 hours.
Some people will struggle if you struggle.
NOTE CONF
Seek help.
What I really want people to understand is that if
NOTE CONF
you get overconfident and you stop working and you fall
behind, it's going to be very hard to recover.
NOTE CONF
So if you find that you're struggling with things or
that things are getting difficult, come and talk to your
NOTE CONF
tutor.
If you're confident in your tutor.
NOTE CONF
Many of our tutors are students, so you might prefer
not to talk about that with them.
NOTE CONF
But if you're struggling, then ask to talk to one
of us.
NOTE CONF
We try to be as available as possible.
Now, hopefully this is all just precautionary.
NOTE CONF
It's just.
I don't want you to go through what I went
NOTE CONF
through.
But as you can see, I came out of it,
NOTE CONF
and I'm here.
So let me just say a bit about me.
NOTE CONF
Why am I doing this?
I'm a mathematician by education.
NOTE CONF
I'm a theoretical computer scientist by training.
Afterwards, my PhD was in theoretical computer science.
NOTE CONF
I've been here all my academic career.
I have been a computer scientist until about the early
NOTE CONF
2000, when I became more interested in linguistics.
And so actually, mostly I do linguistics these days for
NOTE CONF
my research.
Unfortunately, I'm in a school of informatics, which takes the
NOTE CONF
view that any form of reasoning, communication, logic or anything
counts as informatics.
NOTE CONF
So they're quite happy for me to do linguistics.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Why am I teaching you rather, why am I enabling
you to learn on this course?
NOTE CONF
Well, obviously, the simple answer is because they needed someone
to do it, and they looked at me and said,
NOTE CONF
you can do it.
And I said, yes.
NOTE CONF
Great, that will be fun.
And it has been fun.
NOTE CONF
So last year was the most fun I've had in
my entire teaching career.
NOTE CONF
And your challenge is to make this year even more
fun.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Which brings me to the question of why are you
NOTE CONF
here?
So there are lots of reasons for going to university.
NOTE CONF
So this is one of those questions where you might
be shy to put up your hand, but if you're
NOTE CONF
not shy, then do so.
How many of you are you here?
NOTE CONF
Primarily because it's what you need to get the job
you want afterwards.
NOTE CONF
Okay, right.
Don't ask me for advice.
NOTE CONF
I'm a career academic.
Ask the careers service for advice about jobs.
NOTE CONF
Um, how many of you are here?
Basically because you come from a university educated family and
NOTE CONF
nobody ever thought it would be anything else than that.
You go to university.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's good.
NOTE CONF
How many people are first generation university students?
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
Um, how many of you here?
Because you really think computer science is interesting.
NOTE CONF
I hope you're all being completely honest.
And thank you.
NOTE CONF
That's good.
And how many of you are here?
NOTE CONF
Because fundamentally, university is a place to put off the
harsh world for a few years and have fun whilst
NOTE CONF
doing so.
Good.
NOTE CONF
I think that's a very good reason.
But let me emphasise actually university is about having fun.
NOTE CONF
Some of the fun is learning, but there will.
There are other sorts of fun, so don't let the
NOTE CONF
the need to do the academic stuff get in the
way of taking advantage of all the other things there
NOTE CONF
are in universities.
Just don't take too much advantage of them.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that was a kind of general pep talk.
The other thing I wanted to say was something about
NOTE CONF
the marks on this course, because there was a bit
of.
NOTE CONF
Well-intentioned dishonesty in the introductory lecture.
I don't showed you that graph.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And if you appreciate what we mean by it.
NOTE CONF
So the point is that a first class result, which
corresponds to an A in non honours, is supposed to
NOTE CONF
be excellent, not just a normal expectation.
However, actually in reality the marks for this course look
NOTE CONF
like this.
Okay, that doesn't mean that you should consider it your
NOTE CONF
aim to get 100% on the course.
As Don said, it's possible.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you want to aim for it.
Just as something as a bit of fun.
NOTE CONF
Do.
Nobody matters.
NOTE CONF
43 years ago, I lost one mark on my chemistry
A-level.
NOTE CONF
Multiple choice.
And I'm still bitter about it, but nobody else cares.
NOTE CONF
So don't worry about marks.
If you do the work and have fun.
NOTE CONF
The marks a secondary, especially in first year.
There is one slight exception.
NOTE CONF
There are a few of you who should worry a
little bit about marks, but not very much.
NOTE CONF
How many of you are thinking of going to North
America for a third year abroad?
NOTE CONF
Right.
So early piece of advice you need to maintain a
NOTE CONF
straight transcript.
However, getting an A on this course is not hard.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I mean, you don't strictly need to, but experience shows
NOTE CONF
that it's a good idea to maintain a straight transcript
if you're trying to go to the Ivy League.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So before we move into the material proper, anybody got
NOTE CONF
any questions or comments about the course more generally or
what I might be doing?
NOTE CONF
Oh, there's one other thing I meant to say.
Is anybody already feeling annoyed by the Saturday 4 p.m.
NOTE CONF
quiz deadline?
Right.
NOTE CONF
So let me deal with that now.
So if you are one of those people, and if
NOTE CONF
you're a nasty, legalistic minded person, you will go to
our teaching pages and find that we have a policy
NOTE CONF
that all deadlines have to be at noon on a
weekday.
NOTE CONF
So the CLL quiz deadline is in violation of policy.
We know that it's intentional because it's the least bad
NOTE CONF
alternative.
The lecture ends at 3:00 on Friday, so the only
NOTE CONF
legal deadline would be noon on Monday, which is just
silly for a five minute quiz that you will should
NOTE CONF
be doing straight after the lecture.
So those of you who don't like it are welcome
NOTE CONF
to contact me, and I'll give you a personal deadline
of 4:00 on Friday, which is the next best alternative?
NOTE CONF
Um, so why is it 4 p.m. on Saturday rather
than 12 p.m. on Saturday, while the noon on Saturday.
NOTE CONF
Um, because students tell us that noon on Saturday is
not a meaningful time for most of them.
NOTE CONF
So we get hassle from the teaching office every year
about this.
NOTE CONF
And every year we do a poll of students.
So last year I did a poll of the class.
NOTE CONF
50% of the class responded, which is pretty good for
a poll.
NOTE CONF
That's because I put it in one of the tutorial
exercises, and 2% of students didn't like the 4 p.m.
NOTE CONF
deadline.
75% said it worked well.
NOTE CONF
20% said it's fine.
Not brilliant, but fine.
NOTE CONF
2% said they'd rather not in.
2% said they really didn't like it.
NOTE CONF
So if you're one of those who really doesn't like
it, I'm sorry, but you're in the very small minority,
NOTE CONF
so please don't make you go through this thing again.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's start talking about some actual content computation and
logic.
NOTE CONF
What's the difference between computation and logic.
So computation we think of as stuff done by computers.
NOTE CONF
But of course you also do computation.
Once upon a time you were able to arithmetic by
NOTE CONF
hand and in your heads.
Quite possibly you've forgotten how to do it by now.
NOTE CONF
Um, but with a bit of luck you will learn
it again, because I expect everybody to be able to
NOTE CONF
do mental arithmetic.
But what's logic?
NOTE CONF
Anybody get taught logic in school?
A very small number of people.
NOTE CONF
Which is a great pity because logic is useful in
many things.
NOTE CONF
So logic is the language of reasoning.
And actually it's not easy to do reasoning about the
NOTE CONF
real world that we live in for many reasons.
So one of those reasons is that the real world
NOTE CONF
is not a hard edged place, even if we're simply
trying to talk about things, we have to give them
NOTE CONF
names and we have to put them into different classes
of object.
NOTE CONF
And almost none of these categories are hard edged at
the level of fundamental physics.
NOTE CONF
Then they are.
A proton is a proton is a proton.
NOTE CONF
But above that then most things become a bit hard
to make completely sharp.
NOTE CONF
There is a branch of logic called fuzzy logic which
specifically tries to deal with this problem.
NOTE CONF
It was fashionable in the 60s.
It's rather gone out of fashion, and you're not going
NOTE CONF
to meet it here or indeed anywhere else in your
course.
NOTE CONF
There are other ways of dealing with these things nowadays,
which if you go on and do database courses in
NOTE CONF
third and fourth year, you might come across, depending on
what they are by that stage.
NOTE CONF
Another reason that it's hard to do calculations or reasoning
about the world is that there's a lot of randomness
NOTE CONF
in the world.
So we're in Scotland.
NOTE CONF
If you don't already know about Scottish weather, you're going
to find out very quickly.
NOTE CONF
This is the country where you have four seasons in
a day, sometimes twice over.
NOTE CONF
And predicting the weather here is very difficult because of
all the chance.
NOTE CONF
Predicting the stock market.
Wouldn't we all love to be able to predict the
NOTE CONF
stock market?
But we can't.
NOTE CONF
Or even things like playing snooker or billiards or pool.
In principle, that should be a perfectly deterministic thing.
NOTE CONF
You should know what happens, but there's always a bit
of randomness.
NOTE CONF
There's a branch of logic called probabilistic logic, which tries
to do rigorous reasoning about events with chance in them.
NOTE CONF
Again, we won't talk about that at all.
It does come up in some of the fourth year,
NOTE CONF
fourth and fifth year courses.
Another problem is that we don't have the information we
NOTE CONF
need.
So anybody who is dealing with diplomacy, politics, war is
NOTE CONF
in a has a shortage of the information they would
like to have.
NOTE CONF
That's what spies and intelligence services are for, to try
to get more information.
NOTE CONF
What do we do if we just don't have it?
Well, again, there's a branch of logic called logics of
NOTE CONF
imperfect information, which I have worked in at some point,
which tries to give techniques for conducting rigorous arguments when
NOTE CONF
you don't know everything.
Again, we're not going to talk about it.
NOTE CONF
Another problem is that it's just too hard to do
the calculations.
NOTE CONF
Now, what do I mean by that?
It might be that the numerical calculations are too hard.
NOTE CONF
Um, how many of you did physics school up to
higher level?
NOTE CONF
Quite a lot.
You remember the three body three-body problem.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so calculating the orbits of things, if you have
two objects, one orbiting another, you can calculate the orbit.
NOTE CONF
If you have three, then it's no longer possible.
I mean we can do it numerically to an approximation,
NOTE CONF
but we don't have simple equations for it.
So we have to do it by the same sort
NOTE CONF
of approximation technique that we use for computing the weather
or many other things, or some problems are simply so
NOTE CONF
complicated that we can't solve them in a reasonable time.
An example of that is timetabling.
NOTE CONF
Um, so when do you think the university starts the
process of timetabling the courses for this semester?
NOTE CONF
Last year.
When?
NOTE CONF
Last year.
May.
NOTE CONF
Any advance on May.
September of the year before somebody is even more pessimistic.
NOTE CONF
So it starts in about March, which means we have
to commit to what we're teaching by March, which is
NOTE CONF
a right pain, because it means we can't have a
bright idea for a new course.
NOTE CONF
And so when I first started here, I was introducing
new courses in the first week of term, but all
NOTE CONF
that has gone, um, so timetabling is actually an example
of a problem that is provably very hard.
NOTE CONF
And the worst example of it is exams.
So as you know, you don't have exams on this
NOTE CONF
course, but you have exams on other courses and trying
to get 12,000 students to sit exams in several couple
NOTE CONF
of thousand courses without clashes is a very, very hard
computational problem, which is why the exam timetabling also starts
NOTE CONF
months early.
Another thing that makes reasoning difficult is us people.
NOTE CONF
People are very annoying because they're not rational.
So how do you reason about what people are doing
NOTE CONF
even if they are rational?
You have to understand what it is that they know
NOTE CONF
or maybe what they believe.
So there are also branches of logic that are designed
NOTE CONF
to allow reasoning about such things.
And yet again, we're not going to talk about that.
NOTE CONF
So what are we going to do?
We're going to be very, very simple minded.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to think only about statements that are
completely hard edged, completely certain, and at least on the
NOTE CONF
face of it, simple.
So the point of today is to take the complexity
NOTE CONF
of the world and reduce it to something manageable for
the rest of the course, and also for much of
NOTE CONF
the rest of your degrees.
So we're an informatics department.
NOTE CONF
Before you came here, had you heard the word informatics?
Anybody?
NOTE CONF
A few.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, the word did exist, but people like us kind
of jumped on it about 20 years ago because we
NOTE CONF
needed a word that was more general than computer science.
And the really bizarre thing is, in Germany, informatique is
NOTE CONF
the standard word for computer science.
But some of my former informatique department's colleagues in Germany
NOTE CONF
wanted to change the name of their departments to computer
science.
NOTE CONF
But here we are in informatics department, and we define
it as the study of systems that process, that stored
NOTE CONF
process and communicate information And that begs the question of
what is information?
NOTE CONF
So if you go and look in the dictionary, you'll
find that it has a fairly long definition, because it's
NOTE CONF
quite an old word with a lot of history.
And basically it says knowledge about a fact or an
NOTE CONF
event, something which one knows.
And it's an interesting sideline that the very first use
NOTE CONF
of the word information that anybody has found in the
English language, broadly understood, is actually in Scots, not in
NOTE CONF
English, English.
Um, anybody here have Scots as a native, some dialect
NOTE CONF
of Scots as a native language?
Nobody.
NOTE CONF
Do it.
Perhaps.
NOTE CONF
Here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's getting worse.
So last year it was about three.
NOTE CONF
So.
Which is a pity.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this quote is about Some guy who spread
some scurrilous gossip about an abbot and wounded him greatly
NOTE CONF
by spreading the scurrilous gossip.
Um.
NOTE CONF
We live in a world which has way too much
information.
NOTE CONF
You've grown up in it.
I've grown up as it emerged.
NOTE CONF
Um, this garbage is from some terms of use.
How many of you have ever read a Terms of
NOTE CONF
Use document on a website in full?
Okay, just a few.
NOTE CONF
The rest of you try it one day just to
see what's in there.
NOTE CONF
Um, we are in a world which is generating information
at an absurd rate.
NOTE CONF
This was three years old, so it's probably doubled by
now.
NOTE CONF
Um, and what's the use of having 500 hours of
video on YouTube for every minute of time there is
NOTE CONF
finding the right thing.
So our job as computer scientists is largely to handle
NOTE CONF
very large amounts of information and get useful things out
of it.
NOTE CONF
How do we do that?
Well, there's an old engineering principle.
NOTE CONF
How many of you have heard of the Kiss principle
before?
NOTE CONF
A few okay.
I got told that I shouldn't spell it out in
NOTE CONF
full.
It's not a rude word, but apparently if I spelt
NOTE CONF
it out in full, some of you might think I
were calling you stupid.
NOTE CONF
Which is the word.
So kiss is keep it simple, stupid.
NOTE CONF
And what that is intended to say is that engineers
have a tendency to overcomplicate things.
NOTE CONF
Now, as computer scientists, you are also engineers in some
sense.
NOTE CONF
Some of you might even become actual engineers with a
chartered engineering qualification.
NOTE CONF
And there's always a tendency to overcomplicate, especially if you
start something without thinking about it first.
NOTE CONF
So keeping it simple is a really important principle of
engineering, but it's also a very good principle in maths.
NOTE CONF
So how many of you are on joint maths degrees
or even single maths degrees?
NOTE CONF
Okay, thanks.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Maths is about many things.
One of them is proving hard theorems, but a lot
NOTE CONF
of maths is about designing the right notation to think
about the problem, to get the right notation and the
NOTE CONF
right definition, to think about the problem in the first
place.
NOTE CONF
And that's something that we'll also see as we work
through the course.
NOTE CONF
A good definition makes the theorems easier.
Um, so this is a term where we actually know
NOTE CONF
who dreamed it up.
The Lockheed skunkworks Lockheed is an American, largely military aircraft,
NOTE CONF
etc..
Manufacturer, big arms company.
NOTE CONF
They built things like the SR 71, a Blackbird spy
plane, and probably the U-2 as well.
NOTE CONF
And they had this department where all the wacky way
out, very expensive top secret stuff happened, and it was
NOTE CONF
known as the Skunk Works.
And this guy was the lead engineer.
NOTE CONF
And when you're building extremely expensive planes, you want them
to work.
NOTE CONF
And so keeping it simple is one of the principles
that allowed them to succeed.
NOTE CONF
Well, the Lockheed success is a good thing, is another
matter.
NOTE CONF
But we don't do politics in this course.
So we're going to make some simplifying assumptions about the
NOTE CONF
world.
We're going to assume that when we ask a question
NOTE CONF
about a world, we get an answer.
That's not true of the real world, because sensors fail
NOTE CONF
and they're there's fog in the way, all sorts of
reasons why you might not get an answer.
NOTE CONF
We don't worry about that.
We're going to assume that there's only a finite number
NOTE CONF
of possible answers to any given question.
I mean, that's fairly reasonable, because we don't really have
NOTE CONF
any measuring devices that are capable of giving us a
real number as an answer.
NOTE CONF
And in the simplest case, then for any particular observation
sensor question, there are only two possible answers we can
NOTE CONF
get.
There are lots of names we might give for that.
NOTE CONF
Those two answers.
Sometimes they'll be right or wrong.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes true or false.
Up or down.
NOTE CONF
Yin yang.
These symbols we will see.
NOTE CONF
Some people will call these true and false.
Some people call them top and bottom, zero, one, and
NOTE CONF
so on.
And so we end up with the concept of binary
NOTE CONF
data.
How many of you did computer science at school?
NOTE CONF
Slightly more than half.
So all of you are familiar with binary data.
NOTE CONF
You know what a bit is.
So this is going to be a bit dull.
NOTE CONF
The rest of you may or may not have seen
bits and binary data.
NOTE CONF
So key idea everything is reduced to a series of
yes no questions and answers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions at this point.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now I want to set up the the framework
NOTE CONF
work that we're going to use for talking about logic
and computation.
NOTE CONF
And this is where we start introducing technical terms.
So as a general rule, if I put something in
NOTE CONF
purple That means it's a technical term which is being
defined and you should know it.
NOTE CONF
So what's a universe?
This use of the word universe is peculiar to logic.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't mean the whole world out there.
It means just a set of things.
NOTE CONF
I guess you've all come through modern math degrees.
So everybody is familiar with the concept of set as
NOTE CONF
in set theory, right?
Anybody not familiar with set theory?
NOTE CONF
At least up to school level.
Okay, so remember that a set is a very primitive
NOTE CONF
thing.
It has things in it and that's all there is
NOTE CONF
about it.
Now we don't really care what the things are.
NOTE CONF
If we have a set of cats and a set
of dogs, we don't actually care that they're cats and
NOTE CONF
dogs.
We just need ways to talk about them.
NOTE CONF
So we're just going to have names for things in
a set, and the universes we're going to be talking
NOTE CONF
about.
Could be quite small.
NOTE CONF
So, for example, this is the universe of true values.
True and false.
NOTE CONF
Top, bottom.
This is a modest, modest sized universe.
NOTE CONF
If we think about the set of people in the
world, which is, what, 6 billion or so at the
NOTE CONF
moment.
If we think about the set of my emails to
NOTE CONF
you, which is currently empty, but will cease to be
empty quite soon.
NOTE CONF
And anything in between, or indeed at the other side.
And so what we're going to be studying in logic
NOTE CONF
is yes, no questions about universes, about a particular universe.
So any particular logical question is a question and a
NOTE CONF
universe that we're asking it about.
And I'm going to start By illustrating this on one
NOTE CONF
universe which will be familiar to most of you, although
not all of you.
NOTE CONF
Oh, one thing I forgot to say at the beginning.
I didn't write this course.
NOTE CONF
Michael Forman, who was a professor here for a number
of years, wrote the material for this course.
NOTE CONF
I've rewritten quite a lot of it, but most of
the content is his, so I'm still acknowledging that.
NOTE CONF
Michael was a chess player.
He enjoyed chess.
NOTE CONF
I'm a lousy chess player, although I can in principle
play chess.
NOTE CONF
Just to give you an idea of how lousy I
am, my son first fool's mated me when he was
NOTE CONF
six years old.
Um, so is there anybody who is not at all
NOTE CONF
familiar with chess?
Okay, a few people.
NOTE CONF
So chess is a game with these different pieces.
And in English they're generally known as rook, knight, bishop,
NOTE CONF
queen, king and pawn.
Different names in other languages, but generally around the same.
NOTE CONF
The purpose of the game doesn't matter for us at
the moment.
NOTE CONF
All that matters is that there are these different types
of pieces.
NOTE CONF
Also, there are pieces in black and white like most
such board games, but we're not going to worry about
NOTE CONF
the colour of the pieces.
We're just going to talk about the shape of the
NOTE CONF
pieces.
So on the face of it, there are one, two,
NOTE CONF
three, four, five, six different types of chess pieces.
So if I give you a chess piece and ask
NOTE CONF
you what type of piece is it?
Um, there are six possible answers and we don't like
NOTE CONF
six.
We only like two.
NOTE CONF
So how do we take a question with six answers
and reduce it to a series of questions with two
NOTE CONF
answers?
I say, as in the game 20 questions.
NOTE CONF
I have always been surprised that not everybody knows that.
So if I say the 20 questions game, how many
NOTE CONF
of you know what that is about?
Two thirds.
NOTE CONF
Um, so 20 questions is a game popular amongst children
and sometimes adults in English speaking countries at least, and
NOTE CONF
probably many others.
So the idea is, I say I'm thinking of something
NOTE CONF
and you have to guess what it is by asking
me questions to which I can only answer yes or
NOTE CONF
no.
And it's called 20 questions, because that's a reasonable number
NOTE CONF
in which to find out with good probability, but not
too much probability.
NOTE CONF
What I'm thinking about.
And of course, in the real game my object is
NOTE CONF
to think of something that is very ambiguous, so that
you will find it very hard to pin down exactly
NOTE CONF
what I'm thinking of.
But we're not doing that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I'm going to introduce some questions that will
split these pieces into a series of yes no questions.
NOTE CONF
If you are a chess player, then they will probably
seem almost quite, almost natural.
NOTE CONF
Not quite, because I'm cheating a bit.
If you are not a chess player, then you might
NOTE CONF
like to go away after this and think about if
you were designing a series of questions along the lines
NOTE CONF
that I'm about to do.
What questions would you ask if you don't know anything
NOTE CONF
about chess and don't care because there are other questions
you could ask.
NOTE CONF
So in chess, the most important distinction is between these
very weak pieces and the other pieces, which are much
NOTE CONF
stronger.
So a natural first question is, is your piece a
NOTE CONF
pawn or is it not a pawn?
So if you get the answer, it's a yes, it's
NOTE CONF
a pawn.
Then you're done.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise, we have to go on and try to distinguish
these pieces.
NOTE CONF
So then my next question out of 20 for a
chess player might be is it a major piece or
NOTE CONF
a minor piece.
So these pieces are moderately powerful in chess.
NOTE CONF
And these pieces, except this one, are very powerful in
chess.
NOTE CONF
For a chess player, the king is actually a weak
piece.
NOTE CONF
It's the most important piece because if it's captured, you've
lost.
NOTE CONF
But it doesn't have very much offensive power of its
own.
NOTE CONF
It's the kind of king that hides in a bunker
while somebody else does the fighting, whereas the Queen does
NOTE CONF
the real fighting.
Um, So we could say, let's ask, is your peace
NOTE CONF
of mind a peace or a major peace?
If it's a minor peace, we've narrowed it down to
NOTE CONF
being a knight or a bishop.
So we simply ask, is it a knight?
NOTE CONF
And we get the answer yes or no?
If it's a major peace, then we can break it
NOTE CONF
down further.
We could say, for example, is it a rook or
NOTE CONF
sometimes called a castle, which is why it looks like
a castle?
NOTE CONF
Or is it one of the royal pieces, King or
queen?
NOTE CONF
If we get the answer yes, it's major.
Then we're done.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise, we have to break it down further in order
to separate the king and the queen.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a series of questions for questions with
yes no answers, and we can put them in what
NOTE CONF
we call a decision tree like this.
So each circle is a question.
NOTE CONF
And then the way I've designed this, the yes answer
goes to the right.
NOTE CONF
So I'm saying here, is it not a pawn?
And if the answer is yes, that means it's not
NOTE CONF
a pawn.
And I go to the right and I say, is
NOTE CONF
it major?
If the answer is yes, I go to the right.
NOTE CONF
And then I say, is it royal?
And if it's yes, I have to ask, is it
NOTE CONF
a king?
So the decision tree is a way of laying out
NOTE CONF
a series of questions together with their answers, so that
you can classify any piece.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that.
So we're going to come back to this next time
NOTE CONF
as well.
Is the concept clear.
NOTE CONF
Just a simple graphical way of laying out a tree
of questions.
NOTE CONF
So if you were actually playing 20 questions, you might
even want to think this way.
NOTE CONF
Now there's something worth noting about this tree.
What it does is to give us a numerical label
NOTE CONF
to every piece.
So if I look at the pawn, I can identify
NOTE CONF
it by.
I got the answer zero to the first question.
NOTE CONF
If I look at the bishop, I can identifying it
identify it by saying I got the answer one, followed
NOTE CONF
by the answer zero, followed by the answer zero or
false or whatever you want.
NOTE CONF
So what this is doing is giving us an encoding
into binary digits.
NOTE CONF
For each of the pieces.
The pawn is zero, the bishop is 100, knight is
NOTE CONF
one, zero one, and so on.
And the king is 1111.
NOTE CONF
So notice that this is a variable length encoding.
As we say, some pieces have a short encoding, some
NOTE CONF
have longer encoding.
How many.
NOTE CONF
Bits?
So each of these digits is a binary digit 0
NOTE CONF
or 1?
We call it a bit.
NOTE CONF
How many bits do I need to describe the sets
for different kinds of chess pieces?
NOTE CONF
So I've used up to four here.
Do I actually need four?
NOTE CONF
If you think about how many questions this has taken.
When I ask this question, I start with 16 possible
NOTE CONF
pieces, and I break it down into eight pawns or
eight major pieces, and I break it down.
NOTE CONF
How many questions do I have to answer?
If you look at every type of piece and every
NOTE CONF
piece in the chessboard and ask what they are.
It takes me 34 questions in total, which is quite
NOTE CONF
a large number, and that number is the number of
bits in the encoding that we use.
NOTE CONF
So if we had a complete chess set represented in
a computer program by these numerical names for them, then
NOTE CONF
we would have 34 bits worth of storage.
Would we care?
NOTE CONF
Well that depends a bit on the application.
So you've grown up in a world where storage is
NOTE CONF
essentially free.
A very, very long time ago, storage was a very
NOTE CONF
tight resource.
And there are circumstances in which you might care, but
NOTE CONF
we're not going to be going that way.
So we might wonder, is this the best way to
NOTE CONF
do it?
Do you think it's sensible to have a variable length
NOTE CONF
encoding, where some pieces have a label that is one
digit and some have a label that is four?
NOTE CONF
Would it be just easier if they all had the
same length?
NOTE CONF
I mean, it would be easier in some ways.
It might not be a good reason, but yeah.
NOTE CONF
So here's another encoding.
Here I've decided to give everything a three bit encoding.
NOTE CONF
Now ideally I would now stop for ten minutes and
ask you to work out what questions have I asked
NOTE CONF
in order to produce that encoding.
But we don't have time for that in any way.
NOTE CONF
Making you do things in lectures is mean because I
can't think when people are staring at me.
NOTE CONF
Some of you might not like it too.
Um, so.
NOTE CONF
If you go away and think about it, if you
could come up with various possibilities, one thing you might
NOTE CONF
like to do after this lecture is to think about
other possibilities.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to show you one.
But are there others?
NOTE CONF
So that's the tree that corresponds to this encoding.
And those of the questions that I've asked.
NOTE CONF
So I'm using the same questions, but I'm asking them
in a different order.
NOTE CONF
So I'm asking major.
Oh sorry.
NOTE CONF
That's not the same question.
And then I'm separating Bishop and King.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So it is the same questions.
NOTE CONF
So the same questions in a different order.
But there are some dummy questions that don't really apply.
NOTE CONF
So if I go back to this tree here, if
you look at 011, there is no piece that has
NOTE CONF
the encoding 011 in my list.
So I've left some stuff blank in the decision tree,
NOTE CONF
which means over here I don't have an answer to
it.
NOTE CONF
That's okay.
It just means it's a kind of chess piece that
NOTE CONF
doesn't exist, which means I'm never going to talk about
it, and it might simply be more convenient to have
NOTE CONF
three bits per piece, rather than something in between 3
and 4.
NOTE CONF
Um.
How many bits do I need?
NOTE CONF
I showed you something that had 1 to 4.
I showed you something with three.
NOTE CONF
If I have six different types of chess piece, what's
the absolute minimum number of bits I need?
NOTE CONF
Three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Why three?
Let me go back.
NOTE CONF
So people at the back, I expect you to pipe
up as well.
NOTE CONF
Where does three come from?
Log base.
NOTE CONF
Two of six together.
Six possible pieces.
NOTE CONF
And then you round it up.
Yeah, Because the hint is on the slide.
NOTE CONF
So if I give you four bits, that's four binary
digits which have 16 two to the four possible values.
NOTE CONF
So if I gave you two bits, you would have
four possible values 00011011.
NOTE CONF
And that's not enough.
So we need three bits.
NOTE CONF
And then we have a couple of codes left over.
Um and so you just go back and forward with
NOTE CONF
log and exponent.
Um do notice this side bar here.
NOTE CONF
So I put various things in the sidebars of the
slides.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes they're just for fun.
If they're written in green, they're not just for fun.
NOTE CONF
They're part of the slide that I want you to
pay attention to.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you will find that computer scientists use logarithms
quite a lot.
NOTE CONF
But we don't like real numbers, so we never deal
with natural logarithms, at least in my bit of computer
NOTE CONF
science.
And we also don't like the number ten, so we
NOTE CONF
don't deal with the kind of logs that you did
at school.
NOTE CONF
So all our logs are logged to the base two.
And so in computer science it's pretty standard that if
NOTE CONF
we write log we mean log to the base ten.
As in school, if we write ln we mean log
NOTE CONF
to the base E as in school.
And if we write log we mean log to the
NOTE CONF
base two, which is what you're going to be used
to for the rest of your degree here.
NOTE CONF
If by any chance you have forgotten the laws of
logs since you were last examined on them, please make
NOTE CONF
sure they are firmly back in your brain, because I'm
going to assume you can do them without thinking along
NOTE CONF
with many other things.
And we are just approaching time, which is good.
NOTE CONF
So please bear in mind that after this class there
is another large class, so I can't take questions after
NOTE CONF
the lecture in here after this class.
Tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
At the moment there is nothing timetabled afterwards.
So I can and also please go out that door.
NOTE CONF
The engineers before you did not get the difference between
in and out.
NOTE CONF
So for a swift change over head that way and
I'll hang around outside if you want to ask questions.
NOTE CONF